BRITISH JUDO ASSOCIATION
CONTEST RULES
BASED ON THE CONTEST RULES OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL JUDO FEDERATION
2011-12
Issued October 2012Page 2 - Issued 13.10.2012
ISSUE HISTORY
01.08.2003 Initial issue on BJA Website
01.08.2004 1) General editing of text, removal of anomalies and duplications.
2) Appendix Article 23 – Removal of maximum of Waza-ari for interupted 
Tomoe-nage.
3) Appendix Article 27, (9) – Addition of Shido penalty for hooking an opponent’s 
leg for more than 5 seconds without attacking.
4) Appendix Article 27, (23) – Definition of Kawazu-gake added.
5) Continuation in Event of Unconsciousness – period without competition 
increased to 4 weeks for Junior players.
6) Glossary of Japanese Terms added.
01.11.2004 1) Appendix Article 1 – Change “competition” area to “contest” area.
2) Appendix Article 27 (9) – Insert “right side of the” before opponent’s Judogi.
3) Various amendments to text.
24.11.2005 1) Amendments to BJA Commentary to Article 27 regarding application of direct 
Hansoku-make.
31.03.2007 1) Remove all references to Danger Area.
2) Article 1 – Modify competition area specifications.
2) Article 9 - Remove reference to half-body rule in Sutemi-waza. in.
. 3) Article 9, ‘Exceptions’- Add reference to immediate Kaeshi-waza being allowed 
on Safety Area.
4) Articles 13 and 25 - Replace ‘kinsa’ with ‘attack’.
5) Article 27 – Remove Shido penalty for 5 seconds in red area.
31.10.2007 1) BJA Commentary Article 19 – Penalty award in Golden Score must be 
unanimous.
01.08.2009 1) Changes made to Contest Area and Safety Area - Article 1.
2) Scoreboard example updated – Article 2.
3) Article 9 (Location) re-written to define changes to ‘In’ and ‘Out’ criteria.
4) Reference to Koka removed from Gestures (Article 8), Osaekomi Time 
(Article 13), End of Contest (Article19) and Article 25.
5) Article 19 – Golden Score contest length defined as 3 minutes.
6) Article 26 BJA Commentary – 10 seconds increased to 15 seconds.
7) Article 27 – “The first Shido awarded to each player is a free warning” added 
to introduction.
BJA Commentary - Reference to Shido award for trouser grip as initial action and 
criteria for penalty on leaving Contest Area added.
30.01.2010 1) Article 19 – All scores and penalties from the first contest to be carried 
forward to the Golden Score contest.
2) Article 27 – Paragraph (13) modified to include penalty for leg grip offences.
3) Article 27 – Paragraph (34) added to penalise repeat of action described in 
Paragraph (13).
4) Article 27 – Paragraph (35) added to cover penalty for offence against the 
spirit of judo.
01.01.2011 Article 27 (Shido). (13) Remove reference to Leg Grip offence. Add reference to 
hug technique.
BJA Commentary - Remove reference to Leg Grip offence.
01.02.2011 2) Article 27 (Hansoku-make). Add (34) referring to Leg Grip offence.
BJA Commentary – (34) Add reference to application for U12s & U16s.
01.05.2012 Articles 2 and 3 - First contestant called will wear a White Judogi.
Article 27 – Shido No.(23) added – For not attacking after applying Cross Guard.
04.10.2012 Re-worded and updated in line with IJF issue dated 2011-12 Page 3 - Issued 13.10.2012
INDEX
ARTICLE No. ARTICLE DESCRIPTION PAGE No.
ISSUE HISTORY 2
INDEX 3
1 COMPETITION AREA 4 - 5
2 EQUIPMENT 6 - 7
3 JUDO UNIFORM (JUDOGI) 8 - 9
4 HYGIENE 9
5 REFEREES AND OFFICIALS 9 - 10
6 POSITION AND FUNCTION OF REFEREE 10 - 11
7 POSITION AND FUNCTION OF JUDGES 11 - 12
8 GESTURES 12 - 17
9 LOCATION (AREAS VALID) 18
10 CONTEST DURATION 18
11 TIMEOUT 19
12 TIME SIGNAL 19
13 OSAEKOMI TIME 19
14 TECHNIQUE COINCIDING WITH TIME SIGNAL 19
15 START OF CONTEST 19 - 20
16 ENTRY INTO NEWAZA 20 - 21
17 APPLICATION OF MATE 21 - 22
18 SONO MAMA 22
19 END OF CONTEST 22 - 24
19 CARE SYSTEM 24 - 25
20 IPPON 25
21 WAZA-ARI AWASETE IPPON 25
22 SOGO-GACHI 26
23 WAZA-ARI 26
24 YUKO 26
25 KINSA 26
26 OSAEKOMI WAZA 27
27 PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES 28 - 34
28 DEFAULT AND WITHDRAWAL 34
29 INJURY, ILLNESS AND ACCIDENT 34 - 36
30 SITUATIONS NOT COVERED BY THE RULES 37
BJA ADDITIONAL COMMENTS 37
ADDENDUM 'A' 38 - 44
GLOSSARY OF JAPANESE TERMS 45 - 47Page 4 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 1 - Competition Area
The competition area shall be a minimum of 14m x 14m and a maximum of 16m x 16m and shall be 
covered by Tatamis or similarly acceptable material.
The competition area shall be divided into two (2) zones. 
The inner area shall be called the contest area and shall always be of a minimum of 8m x 8m or a 
maximum of 10m x 10m. The area outside the contest area shall be called the safety area and shall be 
a minimum of 3m wide.
The Contest Area will be in one colour and the Safety Area will be a different colour. The colours are 
not defined.
A strip of blue and a strip of white adhesive tape, approximately 10cm wide and 50cm long shall be 
fixed on the centre of the contest area 4m apart, to indicate the starting positions at which the 
contestants must start and end the contest. The white tape shall be to the referee's right and the blue
to his left.
The competition area must be fixed to a resilient floor or platform (see Appendix).
Where two (2) or more adjoining competition areas are used, a common safety area of between 3m 
and 4m is necessary.
A free zone, a minimum of 50cm must be maintained around the competition area.
APPENDIX Article 1 - Competition Area
For Olympic Games, World Championships, Continental and IJF events, the contest area, generally, 
must be 8m x 8m.
Tatamis
Shall measure 1m x 2m, or 1m x 1m, made of pressed foam.
They must be firm under foot, have the property of absorbing shock during Ukemi, and not be slippery 
or too rough.
The elements making up the surface for the competition must be aligned without space in between, be 
smooth of surface and fixed in such a way that they cannot be displaced.
Platform
The platform is optional and must be solidly made of wood, while still having a certain resilience and 
measuring approximately 18m x 18m and no more than 1m in height (generally 50cm or less). (When 
using a platform, it is recommended that the safety area should be 4m wide all around the competition 
area).
BJA Commentary:
For BJA National Competitions and other major competitions, 4m safety areas are required between 
adjoining contest areas and starting tapes are not required. Tapes are optional at other competitions.
For Senior Competitions, the Contest Area may be a minimum of 6m x 6m, although 7m x 7m should 
be used as a minimum where possible.Page 5 - Issued 13.10.2012Page 6 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 2 - Equipment
a) Flags (Referee)
A blue and a white flag for the Referee to use in the Hantei situation in the “Golden Score” 
contest shall be available close by the contest area (e.g. on the Technical Officials table).
b) Chairs and Flags (Judges)
Two (2) lightweight chairs must be placed on the safety area at diagonally opposite corners of 
the contest area and in a position so as not to obstruct the Judges’, Commission members’ and 
Scoreboard Keepers’ view of the scoreboard. A blue and a white flag may be placed in a holster 
affixed to each chair.
c) Scoreboards
For each competition area there shall be two (2) scoreboards, that indicate the scores 
horizontally, placed outside the competition area where they can be easily seen by the 
Referees, Commission members, officials and spectators.
The penalty points shall be immediately converted to the opponent’s technical scores and 
recorded on the scoreboards. However, the scoreboards must be manufactured with a device 
that indicates the penalties received by the contestants. (See Appendix Example)
Whenever electronic scoreboards are used, manual scoreboards must be available as a backup 
(see Appendix).
d) Timing clocks
There shall be timing clocks as follows: 
? Contest duration: one (1)
? Osaekomi: two (2)
? In reserve: one (1)
Whenever electronic timing clocks are used, manual timing clocks must also be used to check their 
accuracy (see Appendix).
e) Flags (Timekeepers)
Timekeepers shall use flags as follows: 
? Yellow Time out
? Green Osaekomi duration
It will not be necessary to use the yellow and the green flags whenever an electronic display 
clock showing contest duration and Osaekomi duration is in use. However, these flags must be 
available in reserve.
f) Time Signal
There shall be a bell or similar audible device to indicate to the Referee the end of the time 
allotted for the contest.
g) Blue and White Judogis
The contestant shall wear either a blue or white Judogi. 
(The first contestant called shall wear the white Judogi, the second shall wear the blue.)
APPENDIX Article 2 - Equipment
Position of Scoreboard Keepers / Contest Sheet Writers / Timekeepers
The Contest Sheet Writers, Scoreboard Keepers and Timekeepers must be facing the Referee. Page 7 - Issued 13.10.2012
Distance of spectators
In general the spectators should not be permitted closer than 3m to the competition area (or 
platform).
Timing clocks and Scoreboards
The timing clocks must be accessible to those persons responsible for maintaining their accuracy, and 
they must be checked for accuracy at the start of and regularly during the competition. The 
scoreboards must meet the standards set out by the IJF and should be at the disposal of the Referees 
as needed.
The manual timing clocks must be used simultaneously with the electronic equipment, in case of failure 
of the electronic timing clocks. The manual scoreboards must be available in reserve.
c) Manual scoreboards
EXAMPLE:
White has scored Waza-ari and has also been penalised with one (1) Shido.
BJA Commentary:
Where reference is made in paragraph e) to ‘flags’, tournament organisers may authorize 
the use of solid ‘bats’ whose colour shall correspond to that specified for the flags.
Where reference is made to blue judogi in paragraph g), tournament organisers may allow 
both players to wear white judogi, with the first player called wearing a white belt and the 
second player wearing a blue belt.
White Judogi is compulsory for the first contestant called and Blue Judogi for the second 
contestant in the Continental Cup, British Championships, National Senior Grand Finals, 
National Young Men’s and Women’s Trials, Scottish Senior Open, Welsh Senior Open and 
Northern Ireland Senior Open.
Although no date has been set for the White player to be called first at all competitions, the 
BJA recommend that this procedure, with the White player to the right of the referee at the 
start of the contest, should be implemented as soon as possible. At the same time, modified 
scoreboards should be used to reflect the new positions of the players.
Note: Contestants are not permitted to wear grade belts in BJA competitions unless the Blue 
contestant is wearing a Blue Judogi.Page 8 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 3 - Judo Uniform (Judogi)
The contestants shall wear a Judogi complying with the following conditions:
a) Strongly made of cotton or similar material, in good condition (without rent or tear). The material 
must not be so thick, hard or slippery as to prevent the opponent from taking a grip.
b) White or off-white for the first contestant and blue for the second contestant.(See Appendix).
c) Acceptable markings:
1) National Olympic abbreviation (on back of jacket). Size of the letters 11cm.
2) National Emblem (on left breast of jacket). Maximum size 100cm².
3) Manufacturer's trade mark must be in a visible area on bottom left of jacket,( Maximum size 
20cm²), or on the bottom edge and inside the permitted publicity zone on the shoulders. 
(25cm x 25cm)
4) Shoulder markings (from collar - across shoulder down the arm - both sides of jacket). 
Maximum length 25cm and maximum width 5cm. (The same advertising or national 
colours on both sides).
5) Advertising on the sleeves, 10cm x 10cm on each sleeve (different advertising allowed). 
These 100cm² have to be fixed just below and in contact with the stripes of 25cm x 5cm.
6) Indication of the placing (1st, 2nd, 3rd) at the Olympic Games or World Championships, in an 
area of 6cm x 10cm at the bottom front left side of the jacket.
7) The contestant's name may be worn on the ends of the belt, lower front of the jacket and upper 
front of the trousers up to a maximum of 4cm x 20cm. Also the contestant's name or 
abbreviation may be placed (printed or embroidered), on the back of the jacket above the 
National Olympic abbreviation, but in no case in a position to prevent an opponent from 
grasping the back of the jacket. The letters can be up to a maximum of 7cm high and the 
length of the name can be up to a maximum of 30 cm long. This 7cm x 30cm rectangular area 
must be located 3cm below the collar of the jacket and the back identification must be fixed at 
4 cm below this area.
Note: For IJF Events and the Olympic Games, the names are indicated on the 30cm x 40cm 
bibs.
d) The jacket shall be long enough to cover the buttocks and shall at a minimum reach to the fists 
when the arms are fully extended downwards at the sides of the body and at least 10cm from the 
knees. The body of the jacket shall be worn with the left side crossed over the right and shall be 
wide enough to have a minimum overlap of 20cm at the level of the bottom of the rib-cage. The 
sleeves of the jacket must reach to the wrist joint at the maximum and 5cm above the wrist joint 
at the minimum. A space of 10 to 15cm shall exist between the sleeve and the arm (bandages 
included), along the entire length of the sleeve.
The lapel and collar must be a maximum of 1cm in thickness and 5cm in width.
e) The trousers, free of any markings except for c7 and as specified in Addendum A, shall be long 
enough to cover the legs and shall at the maximum reach the ankle joint and at the minimum 
5cm above the ankle joint. A space of 10 to 15cm shall exist between the trouser leg and the leg 
(bandages included) from the bottom edge of the trousers to the knee.
f) A strong belt, 4 to 5cm wide and 4 to 5mm thick, whose colour corresponds to the grade, shall 
be worn over the jacket going twice around at waist and tied with a square knot with the first 
loops inside the knot, tight enough to prevent the jacket from being too loose and long enough to 
leave 20 to 30cm protruding from each side of the knot when tied. The belt must not be too stiff 
or too slippery.
g) Female contestants shall wear, under the jacket, a plain white short sleeved, round necked Teeshirt, rather strong, long enough to be worn inside the trousers.Page 9 - Issued 13.10.2012
APPENDIX Article 3 - Judo Uniform (Judogi)
If the Judogi of a contestant does not comply with this article, the Referee must order the 
contestant to change, in the shortest possible time, into a Judogi which does comply with the 
article.
The contestant’s spare Judogi should be brought by the coach to his chair at the edge of the 
competition area.
To ensure that the sleeves of the contestant's jacket are the required length, the Referee shall direct 
the contestant to raise both arms, fully extended forward at shoulder level, when making the control.
Where possible a SOKUTEIKI should be used for Judogi control.
BJA Commentary:
Where reference is made to the colour of the belt in paragraph f), contestants in BJA 
Competitions shall wear only a white or a blue belt unless one competitor wears a blue 
judogi as described in the commentary to Article 2.
Judogi Guideline. -
The reference document is: IJF Judogi Regulations (03/2011).
Note: The belt should have flexibility (softness). When pushing belt by hand from the both ends toward 
knot, the belt knot must not be loosening. Belt using too hard or slippery materials, which is easy to 
have knot loosening, is not allowed. 
ARTICLE 4 – Hygiene
1.The Judogi must not be wet, and show any particular stains and without unpleasant odour.
2. The nails of the feet and hands shall be cut short.
3. The personal hygiene of the contestant shall be of a high standard.
4. Long hair shall be tied so as to avoid causing inconvenience to the other contestant. Hair shall 
be tied by means of a hair band made of rubber or similar material and be void of any rigid or 
metal components. The head may not be covered except for bandaging of a medical nature.
5. Any contestant not willing to comply with the requirements of Articles 3 and 4 shall be refused 
the right to compete and the opponent shall win the contest as provided for in Article 28 of 
these rules, by Fusen-gachi, if the contest has not yet started, or by Kiken-gachi, if the contest 
has already started, according to the “majority of three” rule.Page 10 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 5 - Referees and Officials
Generally, the contest shall be conducted by one (1) Referee and two (2) Judges under the supervision 
of the Refereeing Commission. The Referee and Judges shall be assisted by Scoreboard Keepers and 
Timekeepers.
The Referee’s uniform shall conform with the dress code of the Organisation.
The representatives of the Refereeing Commission can communicate with the Referee by using ear 
pieces.
APPENDIX Article 5 - Referees and Officials
The Organising Committee shall ensure that the Timekeepers, Contest Sheet Writers and Scoreboard 
Keepers as well as other technical assistants have been thoroughly trained as technical officials. There 
shall be a minimum of two (2) Timekeepers; one to register the real contest time and one to specialise
in Osaekomi time. If possible there should be a third person to supervise the two (2) timekeepers to 
avoid any errors due to mistakes or forgetfulness.
The overall Timekeeper (real contest time) shall start the clock on hearing the announcement of
Hajime or Yoshi and shall stop it on hearing the announcement of Mate or Sono-mama.
The Osaekomi timekeeper shall start the clock on hearing Osaekomi, stop it on Sono-mama, and 
restart it on hearing Yoshi. On hearing either Toketa or Mate he shall stop the clock and indicate the 
number of seconds elapsed to the Referee. On expiry of the time for Osaekomi (25 seconds or 20 
seconds if the contestant applying the hold has already been awarded a Waza-ari or the contestant 
being held has already been penalised three (3) Shidos) he shall indicate the end of the Osaekomi by 
means of an audible signal.
The Osaekomi timekeeper shall raise a green flag whenever he starts the clock on hearing the 
announcement and seeing the signal of Osaekomi or Yoshi. He shall lower the flag when he stops the 
clock on hearing Toketa, Mate or Sono-mama, or on expiry of the time for Osaekomi.
The overall timekeeper (real contest time) shall raise a yellow flag whenever he stops the clock on 
hearing the announcement and seeing the signal of Mate or Sono-mama and he shall lower the flag 
when he restarts the clock on hearing Hajime or Yoshi.
When the time allowed for the contest has expired, the Timekeepers shall notify the referee of this fact 
by a clearly audible signal (see Articles 10, 11 and 12 of the Refereeing Contest Rules).
The Scoreboard Keeper must ensure that he is thoroughly familiar with the current Refereeing gestures 
and announcements, so that he can accurately indicate the progress and results of a contest. 
In addition to the above persons there shall be a Contest Sheet Writer to record the overall course of 
the contests.
If electronic systems are used, the procedure shall be the same as described above. However, manual 
timing clocks must also be used simultaneously with the electronic equipment to ensure their 
accuracy and manual scoreboard must be available in reserve.
BJA Commentary:
Where reference is made to ‘flags’, tournament organisers may authorize the use of solid 
‘bats’ whose colour shall correspond to that specified for the flags.
ARTICLE 6 - Position and Function of Referee
The Referee shall generally stay within the contest area. He shall conduct the contest and administer 
the decision. He shall ensure that the decisions are correctly recorded.
APPENDIX Article 6 - Position and Function of Referee
The Referee should ensure that all is in good order e.g. competition area, equipment, uniforms, 
hygiene, technical officials etc. before starting the contest.Page 11 - Issued 13.10.2012
The contestant wearing blue Judogi is to the left of the Referee and the contestant wearing the white 
Judogi is to the right of the Referee.
While announcing an opinion and making the appropriate gesture, the Referee should bring at least 
one Judge within his line of sight in order to be immediately aware of any differing opinion. However 
the Referee must make sure not to lose sight of the contestants’ continuing action at any time.
In cases when both contestants are in Newaza and facing outwards, the Referee may observe the 
action from the safety area.
Before officiating a contest, the Referees and Judges should familiarise themselves with the sound of 
the bell or means of indicating the end of the contest on their particular Tatami, and with the position 
of the Doctor or medical assistant. When assuming control of a competition area the Referee and 
Judges should ensure that the mat surface is clean and in good condition, that there are no gaps 
between the Tatamis, that the Judges’ chairs are in position and that the contestants comply with 
Articles 3 and 4 of the Refereeing Rules. 
The Referees should ensure that there are no spectators, supporters or photographers in a position to 
cause a nuisance or a risk of injury to the contestants.
ARTICLE 7 - Position and Function of Judges
The Judges must assist the Referee and sit opposite each other at two (2) corners outside the contest 
area. Each Judge must indicate his opinion by making the appropriate official gesture, whenever his 
opinion differs from that of the Referee on a technical evaluation or a penalty announced by the 
Referee.
Should the Referee express an opinion on a technical result or a penalty of a higher degree than that of 
the two (2) Judges, he must adjust his evaluation to that of the Judge expressing the higher 
evaluation.
Should the Referee express an opinion on a technical result or a penalty of a lower degree than that of 
the two (2) Judges, he must adjust his evaluation to that of the Judge expressing the lower evaluation.
Should one Judge express an opinion of a higher degree and the other Judge an opinion of a lower 
degree than that of the Referee, the Referee must maintain his opinion.
Should both Judges express a judgment different from that of the Referee, and the Referee does not 
notice their signals, they should stand up and maintain their gesture until the Referee is informed of 
this and rectifies his evaluation. If, after an appreciable time (a few seconds) the Referee has not 
noticed the standing Judges, the Judge who is closest to the Referee must immediately approach him 
and inform him of the majority opinion.
A Judge must, with the appropriate gesture, express his opinion about the validity of any action on the 
edge or outside of the contest area.
A discussion is possible and necessary only if the Referee or one of the Judges has clearly seen 
something, which was not visible to the other two (2), and which could change their decision.
The Judges must also ensure that the scores recorded by the Scoreboard Keepers are the scores 
announced by the Referee.
Should a contestant need to temporarily leave the competition area after the contest has started, for a 
reason considered necessary by the Referee, a Judge must obligatorily go with the contestant to see 
that no anomaly occurs. This authorisation shall be given only in exceptional circumstances (e.g. to 
change a Judogi which does not conform with the rules).
APPENDIX Article 7 - Position and function of judges
The Referee and Judges should leave the competition area during presentations or any lengthy delay in 
the programme.
The Judges should sit with both feet apart, outside the contest area and should place their hands, 
palms facing down, on top of their thighs.Page 12 - Issued 13.10.2012
Should a Judge notice that the scoreboard is incorrect he should draw the Referee's attention to the 
mistake. 
A Judge must be quick to remove himself and his chair should his position endanger the contestants.
A Judge should not pre-empt the Referee's signal for a score.
When an action occurs on the edge, the Judge should make the gesture immediately to show if the 
action is Jonai (In) or Jogai (Out).
Should a contestant have to change any part of the Judogi outside the competition area, and the Judge 
to accompany the contestant is not of the same sex, an official designated by the Refereeing Director 
shall substitute for the Judge and accompany the contestant.
If his competition area is not in use and there is a contest in progress on an adjacent competition area, 
the Judge should remove his chair if it could endanger the contestants.
BJA Commentary:
Should a Judge signal an action ‘OUT’, the Referee (for example) Ippon and the other Judge 
a lesser score, a majority decision should first decide whether the action was ‘IN’ or ‘OUT’ 
then, if judged ‘IN’ a majority decision should decide the score.
ARTICLE 8 - Gestures 
a) The Referee
The Referee shall make gestures as indicated below when taking the following actions: 
1) Ippon: shall raise one arm with palm of hand facing forward, high above the head.
2) Waza-ari: shall raise one arm sideways, with palm of hand facing downwards, to shoulder 
height.
3) Waza-ari-awasete-ippon: first Waza-ari, then Ippon gesture.
4) Yuko: shall raise one arm sideways, with palm of hand facing downwards, 45º from his body.
5) Osaekomi: shall point his arm out from his body down towards the contestants while facing the 
contestants and bending his body towards them.
6) Toketa: shall raise one of his arms to the front and wave it from right to left quickly two or three 
times while bending his body towards the contestants.
7) Hiki-wake: shall raise one of his hands high in the air and bring it down to the front of his body 
(with thumb edge up) and hold it there for a while.
8) Mate: shall raise one of his hands to shoulder height with his arm approximately parallel to the 
Tatami, and display the flattened palm of his hand (fingers up) to the Timekeeper.
9) Sono-mama: shall bend forward and touch both contestants with the palms of his hands.
10) Yoshi: shall firmly touch both contestants with the palms of his hands and bring pressure on 
them.
11) To indicate the cancellation of an expressed opinion: shall repeat with one hand the same 
gesture while raising the other hand above the head to the front and wave it from right to left 
two or three times.
12) Hantei: In preparation of calling Hantei, the Referee shall raise both hands forward at 45° with 
the correct flag in each hand, and then at the announcement of Hantei he shall raise the flag high 
above his head to indicate his opinion.
13) To indicate the winner of a contest: shall raise one open hand, palm in, above shoulder 
height towards the winner.
14) To direct the contestant(s) to re-adjust the Judogi: shall cross left hand over right, palms 
facing inwards, at belt height.
15) To call the Doctor: shall face the medical table, wave an arm (palm upwards) from the direction 
of the medical table towards the injured contestant.Page 13 - Issued 13.10.2012
16) To award a penalty (Shido, Hansoku-make): shall point towards the contestant to be penalised 
with the forefinger extended from a closed fist.
17) Non-combativity: shall rotate, with a forward motion, the forearms at chest height then point 
with the forefinger at the contestant to be penalised.
18) False attack: shall extend both arms forward, with hands closed and then make a downward 
action with both hands.
APPENDIX Article 8 - Gestures
When it is not clearly apparent, the Referee may, after the official signal, point to the white or blue 
tape envisaged, (starting position) to indicate which contestant scored or was penalised.
To indicate to the contestant/s that he may sit cross-legged at the starting position, if a lengthy delay 
in the contest is envisaged, the Referee should signal towards the starting position with an open hand, 
palm upwards.
Yuko and Waza-ari gestures should start with the arm across the chest, then sideways to the correct 
finishing position.
Yuko and Waza-ari gestures should be maintained while moving to ensure that the score is clearly 
visible to the Judges. However, care should be taken when turning to keep the contestants within view.
8) The Hikiwake gesture applies only to Team and Round Robin competitions.
13) The Hantei situation described, will take effect only if there is a draw in scoring at the end of the 
time allotted for the ’Golden Score’ contest.
Should both contestants be given a penalty, the Referee should make the proper gesture and point 
alternately at both contestants (left forefinger for contestant on his left and right forefinger for 
contestant on his right).
Should a rectification gesture be required, it shall be done as quickly as possible after the 
cancellation gesture.
There should be no announcement made when cancelling an expressed opinion.
All gestures should be maintained for 3 to 5 seconds.
To indicate the winner, the Referee shall return to this position at start of the contest, take one step
forward, indicate the winner, and then take one step back.
IPPON WAZA-ARIPage 14 - Issued 13.10.2012
WAZA-ARI-AWASETE- IPPON YUKO
OSAEKOMI SONO-MAMA YOSHI
TOKETA FALSE ATTACKPage 15 - Issued 13.10.2012
NON COMBATIVITY PENALTY
TO CALL THE DOCTOR SIT DOWN STAND UP
ADJUSTMENT OF JUOGI TO CANCEL NOT VALID
EXPRESSED OPINIONPage 16 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 8 – Gestures (continued)
b) The Judges
1) Jonai: To indicate that he considers a throwing technique has started within the contest area and 
is valid, the Judge shall raise one of his hands up in the air and bring it down to shoulder height 
with his thumb upwards and arm extended along the boundary line of the contest area and 
momentarily hold it there.
2) Jogai: To indicate that in his opinion, one or both the contestants have gone out of the contest 
area without a valid action, the Judge shall raise one of his hands to shoulder height with his 
thumb upwards and arm extended along the boundary line of the contest area and wave it from 
right to left, or vice versa, several times.
HAJIME SOREMADE
SREMADE
MATE
KACHI (Winner in a normal contest)
KACHI (Winner by Hantei after 
a “Golden Score” contest)
HANTEI
(Ending a “Golden Score” contest)Page 17 - Issued 13.10.2012
3) To indicate that, in his opinion, a score, penalty or opinion given by the Referee using an Article 8 
gesture has no value, the Judge shall raise one hand above his head and wave it from right to 
left two or three times.
4) To indicate that his opinion differs from that of the Referee, the Judge(s) shall make the 
appropriate Article 8 gesture.
5) In Hantei situations the Judges must hold the flags in the proper hands corresponding to the 
position of the contestants. After the Referee has announced Hantei the Judges shall immediately 
raise either the blue or white flag above their heads in order to indicate which contestant they 
consider merits the decision.
6) When the Judges wish the Referee to announce Mate in Newaza (e.g. no progress), they shall 
signal this by raising both hands to shoulder height with palms facing upwards.
JUDGE NORMAL POS INSIDE JONAI OUTSIDE JOGAI ITION
STAND UP. JUDGE’S OPINION DIFFERS
MATE IN NEWAZA
JUDGE CANCELLING.
NOT VALID
HANTEI SITUATION (Ending a “Golden Score” contest)Page 18 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 9 - Location (Valid Areas)
The contest shall be fought in the contest area. A throwing action must be initiated when at least one 
competitor is in contact with the contest area. Any technique applied when both contestants are 
outside the contest area shall not be recognised.
All actions are valid and may continue (No Mate) as long as either contestant has some part of their 
body touching the contest area.
Exceptions:
a) When a throw is started with only one contestant in contact with the contest area, but during 
the action, both contestants move outside the contest area, the action may be considered for 
point scoring purposes if the throwing action continues uninterrupted.
Similarly, any immediate counter technique by the player who was not in contact with the 
contest area when the throwing action started may be considered for point scoring purposes if 
the action continues uninterrupted.
b) In Newaza, the action is valid and may continue so long as either contestant has some part of 
his body touching the contest area.
APPENDIX Article 9 - Location (Valid Areas)
In the case of Osaekomi on the edge - if the one part of the contestant still touching the contest area 
becomes airborne (i.e. it is raised up and loses contact with the Tatami) - the Referee must announce 
Mate.
Once the contest has started, the contestants may only leave the competition area if given permission 
to do so by the Referee. Permission will only be given in very exceptional circumstances, such as the 
necessity to change a Judogi which does not comply with Article 3 or which has become damaged or 
soiled.
ARTICLE 10 - Duration of contest
1. The duration of the contests and the contest form shall be determined according to the rules of the 
tournament. 
For all Championships held under the responsibility of the IJF the time duration of the contests, the 
Golden Score and resting time between contests will be referred to in paragraph 6 of the SOR and 
these Rules. 
This regulation will provide guidance and guidelines to follow both National Championships and the rest 
of Official Tournaments.
Senior Men and Women 5 minutes real time and 3 minutes “Golden Score”
Junior Under 20 Men and Women 4 minutes real contest time and 2 minutes “Golden Score”
Cadet Under 17 Men and Women 4 minutes real contest time and 2 minutes “Golden Score”
In Team Championships the time duration of contest will be 5 minutes and 3 minutes the period of 
'Golden Score’.
2. Any contestant is entitled to a 10 minutes rest between contests.
BJA Commentary:
For BJA Competitions, the rest period allowed will be equal to the full duration allowed for 
the contestant’s previous contest.
3. The referee should be aware of the duration of the contest before coming onto the competition area.Page 19 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 11 - Time out
The time elapsed between the announcement of Mate and Hajime and between Sono-mama and Yoshi
by the Referee shall not count as part of the duration of the contest.
ARTICLE 12 - Time Signal
The end of the time allotted for the contest shall be indicated to the Referee by the ringing of a bell or 
other similar audible signal.
APPENDIX Article 12 - Time signal
When using several competition areas at the same time - the use of different audible signals is 
required. 
The time signal must be sufficiently loud to be heard over the noise of the spectators.
ARTICLE 13 - Osaekomi Time
1. Equivalences.
a) Ippon: Total of 25 seconds.
b) Waza-ari: 20 seconds or more but less than 25 seconds.
c) Yuko: 15 seconds or more but less than 20 seconds.
d) Kinsa: An Osaekomi of less than 15 seconds will, for Hantei purposes, count as a Kinsa, 
as required by Article 25 of these rules.
2. Simultaneous Osaekomi with the time signal.
When Osaekomi is announced simultaneously with the time signal or when the remaining time is 
insufficient to allow for the completion of the Osaekomi, the time allotted for the contest shall be 
extended until either Ippon (or equivalence) is announced or the Referee announces Toketa or Mate.
During that time the contestant who receives the Osaekomi (Uke), can counter-attack by applying 
Shime-waza or Kansetsu-waza. In case of gaining a submission or the incapacity of the contestant 
making the Osaekomi (Tori), the one who’s under the Osaekomi (Uke) will win the contest by Ippon.
ARTICLE 14 - Technique coinciding with Time Signal
1. Any immediate result of a technique started simultaneously with the time signal shall be valid.
2. Although a throwing technique may be applied simultaneously with the bell, if the Referee 
decides that it will not be effective immediately, he shall announce Sore-made.
3. Any technique applied after the ringing of the bell or other device to indicate the expiry of 
the time of the contest shall not be valid, even if the Referee has not yet announced Soremade.
4. In the case of Osaekomi announced simultaneously with the time signal, the time allotted 
for the contest shall be extended until either Ippon (or equivalence) is scored or the 
Referee announces Toketa or Mate.
ARTICLE 15 - Start of the contest
1.- Before the start of each working day of the Championships the Referee and Judges shall stand 
together just inside the limits of the competition area (centred) and bow to Joseki, and each other 
before taking their places.
At the end of the Championship, they will repeat the same bowing ceremony as that at the beginning. 
2.- The Referee and Judges shall always be in position to start the contest before the arrival on the 
contest area of the contestants.Page 20 - Issued 13.10.2012
In individual competitions the Referee shall be at the centre, 2m back from the line from which the 
contestants start, and shall be facing the timekeepers’ table. Judges will be seated in their respective 
chairs. 
In team competitions, before the start of the contests from every encounter, it shall proceed to the 
bowing ceremony between the two teams as follows:
a.- The Referee will remain in the same place as in the individual competitions, being 
accompanied by the Judges. At his indication the two teams will come in on the side allotted, in 
line for the outer edge of contest area, in descending order and the heaviest weight being closer 
to the Referee and Judges, standing face to face team.
b.- Upon order of the Referee the two (2) teams, after bowing when entering the contest area, 
will move ahead to the starting line marked on the mat.
c.- The Referee shall order the teams turn towards Joseki, extending his arms in parallel 
forward, with open palms, and will announce Rei, to be held simultaneously by all components 
of both teams. The Referee and Judges shall not bow.
d.- Then the Referee shall order, in a gesture of arms at right angles forearms up and palms 
facing each other "OTAGAI-NI" (bow to each other), the two teams again be face to face, 
announcing Rei, to be held the same way as in the previous section.
e.- After finishing the bowing ceremony the components of the two teams will come out through 
the same place which they entered, waiting, on the outer edge centred of the contest area, the 
contestants of each team must make the first contest. In each contest they will perform the 
same procedure of bowing that in individual competition.
f.- After finishing the last contest of the encounter, the Judges will go to the starting position, 
by the Referee. The Referee will order the teams to proceed as described in paragraph a and b, 
then announcing the winner. The bowing ceremony will be held in the reverse order of the start, 
bowing first to each other and, finally, to Joseki although this is not compulsory.
4.- The contestants shall then walk to the centre of the edge of the contest area (on the safety area) at 
their respective side according the fighting order (first called on the right side and second called on the 
left side of the Referee’s position), and remain standing there. After the signal from the Referee, the 
contestants shall move forward to their respective starting positions and bow simultaneously towards 
each other and take a step forward from the left foot. Once the contest is over and the Referee has 
award the result, the contestants shall simultaneously take a step back from the right foot and bow to 
each other.
If the contestants do not bow or do so incorrectly (it will be everyone who does not have an angle of 
30 degrees measured from the waist), the Referee shall direct the contestants to do so. It is very 
important to perform the bow in a very correct way.
5.- The contest shall always begin in the standing position when the Referee announces Hajime.
6.- The accredited doctor may request that the Referee stops the contest in the cases and with the 
consequences regulated in Article 29.
7.- The members of the Refereeing Commission may interrupt the contest.
ARTICLE 16 - Entry into Newaza
1.- The contestants shall be able change from Tachi-waza to Newaza as far as it is done by one of the 
cases referred to in this Article. However, if the technique used is not continuous, the Referee shall 
announce Mate and order both contestants to resume the fight from the standing position.Page 21 - Issued 13.10.2012
2.- Situations that allows the passage from Tachi-waza to Newaza. 
a) When a contestant, after obtaining some result by a throwing technique changes without 
interruption into Newaza and takes the offensive.
b) When one of the contestants falls to the ground, following the unsuccessful application of a 
throwing technique, the other may take advantage of his opponent's unbalanced position to take 
him to the ground.
c) When one contestant obtains some considerable effect by applying a Shime-waza or Kansetsuwaza in the standing position and then changes without interruption to Newaza.
d) When one contestant takes his opponent down into Newaza by the particularly skilful application 
of a movement which does not qualify as a throwing technique.
e) In any other case where one contestant falls down or is about to fall down, not covered by the 
preceding sub-sections of this article, the other contestant may take advantage of his opponent's 
position to go into Newaza.
3.- Exceptions
When one contestant pulls his opponent down into Newaza not in accordance with Article 16 and his 
opponent does not take advantage of this to continue into Newaza, the Referee shall announce Mate, 
stop the contest and penalise with Shido the contestant who has infringed Article 27.(a).(7). If the 
opponent takes advantage of the action of Tori, the Newaza work may continue and the Shido should
be applied after the next Mate.
ARTICLE 17 - Application of Mate
1.- General. 
The Referee shall announce Mate in order to stop the contest temporarily in the cases covered by this 
article, and the contestants must quickly return to their starting positions defined in paragraph 3 of 
Article 1 of these Rules. To recommence the contest, he shall announce Hajime: 
The Referee, having announced Mate, must take care to maintain the contestants within his view, in 
case they do not hear Mate announced and continue fighting or any other incident arises. 
2.- Situations where the Referee shall announce Mate.
a) When one or both of the contestants go outside the contest area. 
(See "Exceptions" under Article 9).
b) When one or both of the contestants perform one of the prohibited acts.
c) When one or both of the contestants are injured or taken ill. In case of the occurrence of any of 
the provisions of article 29, the Referee, after announcing Mate, will call the doctor to perform 
medical attention of that article, either upon the request of the contestant, or directly depending 
on the seriousness of the injury, allowing the contestant, in order to facilitate performance, to 
adopt any other position than the starting position.
d) When it is necessary for one or both of the contestants to adjust their Judogi.
e) When during Newaza there is no apparent progress.
f) When one contestant regains a standing or semi-standing position from Newaza bearing his 
opponent on his back with the hands completely clear of the Tatami, indicating a loss of control 
by the opponent.
g) When one contestant is in, or from Newaza regains a standing position and lifts his opponent, 
who is lying on his back with his leg(s) around any part of the standing contestant, clear of the 
Tatami.Page 22 - Issued 13.10.2012
h) When a contestant performs or attempts to perform Kansetsu-waza or Shime-waza from the 
standing position and the result is not sufficiently apparent.
i) When one of the contestants starts or perform any preparatory moves of an illegal technique, the 
Referee shall call immediately Mate, trying to stop and not to let the contestant who performs, 
finish the action.
j) When in any other case that the Referee deems it necessary to do so.
k) When the Referee and Judges or Refereeing Commission wish to confer.
3.- Situations where the referee should not announce Mate.
The Referee should not call Mate to stop the contestant(s) going outside the contest area, unless the 
situation is considered dangerous.
The Referee should not announce Mate when a contestant who has escaped e.g. from Osaekomi, 
Shime-waza, Kansetsu-waza, appears in need of or calls for a rest.
4.- Exceptional situations
Should the Referee call Mate in error during Newaza and the contestants therefore separate, the 
Referee and Judges may, if possible, and in accordance with the "majority of three" rule, replace the 
contestants into as close to their original position as possible and restart the contest, if so doing will 
rectify an injustice to one of the contestants.
ARTICLE 18 – Sono-mama
1.- In any case where the Referee wishes to temporarily stop the contest without causing a change in 
their positions, he shall announce Sono-mama, making the gesture under Article 8.a).9) while he must 
ensure that there is no change in the position or grip of either contestant.
2.- Sono-mama can only be applied in situations where the contestants are working in Newaza.
3.- Situations:
a.- To award a penalty.
If the contestant who is awarded the penalty is in an unfavourable position, there is no Sonomama: the penalty is awarded immediately.
b.- Medical assistance.
If, during Ne-waza, a contestant shows signs of injury and according to Article 29 may be 
assisted by the doctor, the Referee may announce Sono-mama and separate the contestants if 
necessary.
Subsequently, the Referee will place the contestants back in the positions they held before the 
announcement of Sono-mama, helped by the judges according to the ‘majority of three’ rule.
4.- To recommence the contest, the Referee shall announce Yoshi making the gesture under Article 
8.a).10.
ARTICLE 19 - End of Contest
1.- The Referee shall announce Sore-made to indicate the end of contest in the cases covered in this 
article. After this announcement, the Referee shall always keep the contestants within his view, in case 
they do not hear his announcement and continue fighting.Page 23 - Issued 13.10.2012
The Referee shall direct the contestants to adjust their Judogis, if necessary, prior to indicating the 
result.
After the Referee has indicated the result of the contest making the gesture under Article 8.a).13), the 
contestants shall take one step backwards to their respective white and blue tapes, make the bow and 
leave the contest area by the sides of the mat, particularly around the security area
Should the Referee award the victory to the wrong contestant in error, the two Judges must ensure 
that he changes this erroneous decision before the Referee and Judges leave the competition area, at 
which the decision becomes firm without possible modification. If a member of the Refereeing 
Commission notices the error, he may call them to indicate it, but it shall be, as described by the 
following paragraph, up to the Referee and Judges to decide the most appropriate action.
All actions and decisions taken in accordance with the “majority of three” rule by the Referee and 
Judges shall be final and without appeal.
BJA Commentary
In BJA competitions, a player or coach may approach the Referee in Charge to ask for his investigation 
of any disputed decision which may be changed if appropriate.
2.- Situations of Sore-made.
a) When one contestant scores Ippon or Waza-ari-awasete-Ippon (Articles 20 and 21).
b) In the case of Sogo-gachi (Article 22).
c) In the case of Kiken-gachi (Article 28). 
d) In the case of Hansoku-make (Article 27).
e) When one contestant cannot continue due to injury (Article 29).
f) When the time allotted for the contest has expired.
3.- The Referee shall award the contest as follows:
Where one contestant has scored Ippon or equivalent, he shall be declared the winner.
a) Where there has been no score of Ippon or equivalent, the winner shall be declared on the 
basis of: one Waza-ari prevails over any number of Yukos.
b) Where there are no recorded scores or the scores are exactly the same under each point
(Waza-ari, Yuko) the contest shall be decided by the “Golden Score” contest in both individual 
and team championships.
“Golden Score” Contest
When the time allotted for the contest ends giving the circumstances of paragraph 3.c. of this 
article, the Referee shall announce “Sore-made” to end the contest temporarily and the 
contestants shall return to their starting positions.
The time clocks shall be reset but the scoreboard record for the contest will be retained,
The Referee shall announce “Hajime” to restart the contest. There shall be no rest period 
between the end of the original contest and the start of the “Golden Score” contest, whose 
duration is indicated in Article 10 of these Rules.
The contest ends as soon as a contestant is awarded a score difference over his opponent, the 
Referee will announce “Sore-made”. 
In the “Golden Score” contest, when one contestant is being held and “Osaekomi” has been 
announced, the Referee shall allow the hold down to continue for the 25 seconds (Ippon), until Page 24 - Issued 13.10.2012
Toketa or Mate, or until Shime-waza/Kansetsu-waza is applied by either contestant with 
immediate result.
In this case, the contestant shall win by the points scored.
If during the “Golden Score” contest a direct Hansoku-make is given, the result for the 
penalised player will incur the same consequences as during a normal contest. 
In the event that the Referee decides to penalise one contestant, and this penalty would mean 
the victory of his opponent, he must first consult with the Judges and make the decision based 
on the "majority of three rule".
If the “Golden Score” contest goes the full duration without any advantage for either 
contestant, the result shall be decided by Hantei following the procedures provided for in Article 
8 of these rules. In this case, the Referee and Judges shall take into consideration the “Kinsa” 
defined in Article 25 of these Rules, the attitude and skilfulness had during the whole contest; 
that is to say, during the time allotted to the first contest and the “Golden Score” contest. 
5.- Special situations on the “Golden Score”
a. Should only one contestant exercise his right to fight the “Golden Score” contest, and the other 
contestant declines, the contestant who wishes to fight shall be declared the winner by “Kikengachi”.
b. In the case where both contestants score Ippon or Sogo-gachi simultaneously during the time 
allotted to the first contest, the contest shall be decided by the “Golden Score” contest. In the 
case of simultaneous Ippon during the "Golden Score" contest the Referee shall announce Mate, 
continuing the contest without taking into account these actions for scoring purposes.
c. In the case where both contestants are penalised with accumulated Hansoku-make (result from 
successive Shidos) simultaneously, or where one contestant is penalised with an accumulated 
Hansoku-make and is simultaneously awarded Sogo-gachi, the contest shall be decided by the 
“Golden Score” contest.
d. In the case where both contestants are penalised with direct Hansoku-make simultaneously, 
both contestants shall be excluded from the tournament.
BJA Commentary:
During a BJA Team Competition, the decision of “Hikiwake” will be applied as follows:-.
During the first confrontation between the teams, Hikiwake decisions will be given where 
applicable unless decided otherwise by the Competition Controller.
If,( e.g. during the knock-out stage), it is essential to decide a winner between the two 
teams and, at the end of the confrontation, the number of victories and points is the same 
for both teams, then all the contests with the result of “Hikiwake” from the previous 
confrontation will be fought to decide the winning team. These deciding contests shall be 
“Golden Score” contests.
The Competition Controller is authorised to amend this procedure.
(The same system may be used in Round Robin competition).
If the teams are still equal at the end of the Golden Score contests, then the Competition 
Controller will assess the situation and decide on the appropriate action.
6.- CARE System
The CARE system as defined in Article 2 of these Rules and the SOR, it will be the exclusive 
competence of the Refereeing Commission, and no one can interfere or define its operation outside the 
rules here listed or, in what was not covered, by the decision made by the Refereeing Commission in 
this regard.Page 25 - Issued 13.10.2012
Provides for the following situations of use: 
a. The Member of the Commission will intervene, stopping the contest and holding a brief meeting 
with the Referee and Judges on the edge of the mat, in the cases defined below.
b. The member of the Commission may make an affirmative gesture, making unnecessary the 
meeting at the edge of the mat, when in his judgment, and after viewing both live and then in 
the CARE system, his opinion is according to that taken by the Referee and Judges.
It will be mandatory viewing of the image in the CARE system and checking the adequacy of the 
refereeing decision on the following points:
a. Any decision involving the end of the contest, during the contest time as well as in the period of 
"Golden Score". 
b. Kaeshi actions where there may be difficulty in the assessment of which contestant had the 
power of the action and imply the end of the contest.
It will be an option for the Refereeing Commission member that oversees the mat, to view the action
through the CARE system and have subsequent communication with the Referee and Judges as 
regulated in this Article, for any action that, in his opinion, provides some doubt. No-one else is
authorised to use or request the use of the CARE system.
ARTICLE 20 - Ippon
1.-The Referee shall announce Ippon when in his opinion the applied technique corresponds to the 
following criteria:
a) When a contestant with control throws the other contestant largely on his back with considerable 
force and speed.
If one of the contestants deliberately makes a "bridge" (head and one foot or both feet in contact 
with the Tatami) after having been thrown - although he may have avoided the necessary criteria 
for Ippon, the Referee shall nonetheless award Ippon or any other score he considers the 
technique warrants, in order to discourage this action.
b) When a contestant holds with Osaekomi-waza the other contestant, who is unable to get away 
for 25 seconds after the announcement of Osaekomi.
c) When a contestant gives up by tapping twice or more with his hand or foot or says Maitta (I give 
up!) generally as a result of Osaekomi-waza, Shime-waza or Kansetsu-waza.
d) When a contestant is incapacitated by the effect of a Shime-waza or Kansetsu-waza.
2.-Equivalence.
Should one contestant be penalised with Hansoku-make, the other contestant shall immediately be 
declared the winner.
3.- Special situations.
a. Simultaneous techniques: - when both contestants fall to the Tatami after what appears to be 
simultaneous attacks, and the Referee and Judges cannot decide which technique dominated, 
there should be no score awarded.
b. In the case where both contestants score simultaneous Ippon the Referee will act as regulated 
in article 19 paragraph 5.b.
ARTICLE 21 - Waza-Ari-awasete-ippon
Should one contestant gain a second Waza-ari in the contest, (see Article 23) the Referee shall 
announce Waza-ari-awasete-ippon.Page 26 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 22 - Sogo-gachi (compound win)
The Referee shall announce Sogo-gachi in the following cases:
(a) Where one contestant has gained a Waza-ari and his opponent subsequently receives three (3)
Shidos (see Article 27 (a).)
(b) Where one contestant, whose opponent has already received three (3) Shidos, is subsequently 
awarded a Waza-ari.
Simultaneous Sogo-gachi - See Article 19.5.b.
ARTICLE 23 - Waza-ari
The Referee shall announce Waza-ari when in his opinion the applied technique corresponds to the 
following criteria:
(a) When a contestant with control throws the other contestant, but the technique is partially lacking 
in one (1) of the other three (3) elements necessary for Ippon (see Article 20 (a) and Appendix).
(b) When a contestant holds with Osaekomi-waza the other contestant who is unable to get away for 
20 seconds or more, but less than 25 seconds.
Equivalence: Should one contestant have been penalised three (3) Shido penalties, the other 
contestant shall receive a Waza-ari immediately.
ARTICLE 24 - Yuko
The Referee shall announce Yuko when in his opinion the applied technique corresponds to the 
following criteria:
(a) When a contestant with control throws the other contestant, but the technique is partially lacking 
in two (2) of the other three (3) elements necessary for Ippon.
Examples:
i) Partially lacking in the element of "largely on the back" and is also partially lacking in 
one of the other two (2) elements of "speed" or "force".
ii) Largely on the back but partially lacking in both of the other two (2) elements of "speed" and 
"force".
(b) When a contestant holds with Osaekomi-waza the other contestant who is unable to get away for 
15 seconds or more but less than 20 seconds.
Equivalence: Should one contestant have been penalised two (2) Shidos, the other contestant shall 
receive Yuko immediately.
APPENDIX Article 24 - Yuko
Regardless of how many Yukos are announced, no amount will be considered equal to a Waza-ari. The 
total number announced will be recorded.
ARTICLE 25 - Kinsa
Kinsa is an attack or control that overcomes a contestant, but is not sufficient enough to be assessed 
as score; it is a technical advantage over his opponent both in Tachi-waza and Newaza. 
The Kinsa is not recorded on the scoreboard, and the referee will not announce or make any gesture. 
The Kinsas are only be taken into account in contests that, after ending the time allotted for the 
"Golden Score" without advantage for any contestant, the result should be decided by Hantei. 
The Kinsas are cumulative and the Referee and Judges shall take into consideration not only the 
number obtained, but also the best technical level obtained.Page 27 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 26 - Osaekomi-waza
The Referee shall announce Osaekomi when in his opinion the applied technique corresponds with the 
following criteria:
(a) The contestant being held must be controlled by his opponent and must have his back, both 
shoulders or one shoulder in contact with the Tatami.
(b) The control can be made from the side, from the rear or from on top.
(c) The contestant applying the hold must not have his leg(s) or body controlled by his opponent's 
legs.
(d) At least one contestant must have some part of his body touching the contest area.
(e) The contestant applying the hold must have his body in either the Kesa or the Shiho position, i.e. 
similar to the techniques Kesa-gatame or Kamishiho-gatame.
APPENDIX Article 26 - Osaekomi-waza
Should a contestant who is controlling his opponent with an Osaekomi-waza, change without losing 
control, into another Osaekomi-waza, the Osaekomi time will continue until the announcement of 
Ippon (or equivalence Toketa or Mate).
When Osaekomi is being applied, if the contestant who is in an advantageous position commits an 
infringement meriting a penalty, the Referee shall announce Mate, return the contestants to their 
starting positions, award the penalty (and any score from the Osaekomi), then recommence the 
contest by announcing Hajime.
When Osaekomi is being applied, if the contestant who is in a disadvantageous position commits an 
infringement meriting a penalty, the Referee shall, without interruption to the action, award the 
penalty. However, should the penalty to be awarded be Hansoku-make, the Referee shall after 
announcing Sono-mama, consult with Judges, announce Mate to return the contestants to their 
starting positions, then award Hansoku-make and end the contest by announcing Sore-made. 
If both Judges agree that an Osaekomi exists, but the Referee has not announced Osaekomi, they shall
make the Osaekomi gesture and, by the "majority of three" rule, the Referee shall announce Osaekomi
immediately.
The Referee shall announce Mate in the case of "Osaekomi on the edge", when the one part of the 
contestant still touching the contest area, becomes airborne (i.e. it is raised up and loses contact with 
the Tatami).
Toketa should be announced if, during Osaekomi, the contestant being held succeeds in "scissoring" 
the other contestant's leg, either from above or from below the leg.
In situations where the back of the contestant being held is no longer in contact with the Tatami, (e.g. 
"bridging"), but the contestant applying the hold maintains control, the Osaekomi shall continue.
BJA Commentary:
If, in a “Golden Score” contest, Tori has maintained an Osaekomi for 15 seconds or more 
and then commits a minor infringement, the Referee shall announce Mate and award the 
score merited by the length of the Osaekomi. He shall then indicate Tori as the winner of the 
contest.
If the Referee and Judges consider that Tori’s infringement merits Hansoku-make, then they 
may award the contest to the other player.Page 28 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 27 - Prohibited Acts and Penalties
The Prohibited Acts are divided into ‘Slight’ infringements (Shido) and ‘Grave’ infringements 
(Hansoku-make).
SLIGHT INFRINGEMENTS: Will receive a penalty of Shido.
GRAVE INFRINGEMENTS: Will receive a penalty of direct Hansoku-make.
The Referee shall award a penalty of Shido or Hansoku-make depending on the seriousness of the 
infringement.
The first Shido awarded to each player is a free warning.
The awarding of a second Shido automatically reflects on the opponent’s technical score. With 
subsequent Shidos, the previous score corresponding to the earlier penalty is removed and the next 
higher score shall be recorded immediately.
The awarding of a direct Hansoku-make means that the contestant is disqualified and excluded from 
the tournament, and the contest ends according to the article 19 (d). (See BJA Commentary at the 
end of this Article).
Whenever a Referee awards a penalty, he should demonstrate with a simple gesture the reason 
for the penalty. 
A penalty can be awarded after the announcement of Sore-made for any prohibited act done during 
the time allotted for the contest or, in some exceptional situations, for serious acts done after the 
signal to end the contest, as long as the decision has not been given.
SHIDO (Slight Infringements Group)
(a) Shido is given to any contestant who has committed a slight infringement:
(1) To intentionally avoid taking Kumi-kata in order to prevent action in the contest.
(2) To adopt in a standing position, after Kumi-kata, an excessively defensive posture. (Generally 
more than 5 seconds).
(3) To make an action designed to give the impression of an attack but which clearly shows that 
there was no intent to throw the opponent. (False Attack).
(4) In a standing position, to continually hold the opponent's sleeve end(s) for a defensive purpose 
(Generally more than 5 seconds) or to grasp by "screwing up" the sleeve end(s).
(5) In a standing position, to continually keep the opponent's fingers of one or both hands 
interlocked, in order to prevent action in the contest. (Generally more than 5 seconds).
(6) To intentionally disarrange his own Judogi or to untie or retie the belt or the trousers without 
the referee's permission.
(7) To pull the opponent down in order to start Newaza unless in accordance with Article 16.
(8) To insert a finger or fingers inside the opponent's sleeve or bottom of his trousers. 
(9) In a standing position to take any grip other than a "normal" grip without attacking. (Generally 
more than 5 seconds).
(10) In a standing position, before or after Kumi-kata has been established, not to make any 
attacking moves. (See Appendix Non-combativity).
(11) To hold the opponent’s sleeve end(s) between the thumb and the fingers (“Pistol” grip). 
(12) To hold the opponent’s sleeve end(s) by folding it over (“Pocket” grip). 
(13) As an attempted throwing technique, to hug the opponent in a chest to chest position with both 
arms encircling the body whether the hands are touching or not. 
(The first offence will be Mate with a free warning.)
(14) To encircle the end of the belt or jacket around any part of the opponent's body.
(15) To take the Judogi in the mouth. (either his own or his opponent's Judogi).
(16) To put a hand, arm, foot or leg directly on the opponent's face.Page 29 - Issued 13.10.2012
(17) To put a foot or a leg in the opponent's belt, collar or lapel.
(18) To apply Shime-waza using the bottom of the jacket or belt, or using only the fingers.
(19) To go outside the contest area or intentionally force the opponent to go outside the contest area 
either in standing position or in Newaza. (See Article 9 - "Exceptions")
(20) To apply leg scissors to the opponent's trunk (Dojime), neck or head. (Scissor with crossed feet, 
while stretching out the legs).
(21) To kick with the knee or foot, the hand or arm of the opponent, in order to make him release 
his grip or to kick the opponent’s leg or ankle without applying any technique.
(22) To bend back the opponent's finger(s) in order to break his grip.
BJA Commentary:
(19) If a contestant leaves the contest area as a result of an action by his opponent, he 
should not be penalised.
However, if he leaves the contest area as a result of his own action, without any throwing 
action being attempted, a Shido penalty should be awarded.
HANSOKU-MAKE (Grave Infringements Group)
(b) Hansoku-Make is given to any contestant who has committed a Grave Infringement (or who 
having been given three (3) Shidos, commits a further Slight Infringement):
(23) To apply Kawazu-gake. (To throw the opponent by winding one leg around the opponent's leg, 
while facing more or less in the same direction as the opponent and falling backwards onto 
him). 
(24) To apply Kansetsu-waza anywhere other than to the elbow joint.
(25) To lift off the Tatami the opponent who is lying on the Tatami and to drive him back onto the 
Tatami.
(26) To reap the opponent’s supporting leg from the inside when the opponent is applying a 
technique such as Harai-goshi etc.
(27) To disregard the Referee's instructions.
(28) To make unnecessary calls, remarks or gestures derogatory to the opponent or Referee during 
the contest.
(29) To make any action which may endanger or injure the opponent, especially the opponent's 
neck or spinal vertebrae, or may be against the spirit of Judo.
(30) To fall directly to the Tatami while applying or attempting to apply techniques such as Udehishigi-waki-gatame.
(31) To "dive" head first, onto the Tatami by bending forward and downward while performing or 
attempting to perform techniques such as Uchi-mata, Harai-goshi, etc. or to fall directly 
backwards while performing or attempting to perform techniques such as Kata-guruma
whether standing or kneeling.
(32) To intentionally fall backwards when the other contestant is clinging to his back and when 
either contestant has control of the other's movement.
(33) To wear a hard or metallic object (covered or not).
(34) From a standing position, to grip or block with hand(s) or arm(s) below the belt of the 
opponent as the initial action of an attacking or defensive movement. Any leg grip counter 
technique will only be valid if a genuine attack has been made by the opponent. Any leg grip 
technique applied simultaneously with a genuine attack will be penalised by Hansoku-make.
(35) Any action against the spirit of judo may be punished by a direct Hansoku-make at any time in 
the contest.
NOTE: The first Shido awarded to each player is a free warning.Page 30 - Issued 13.10.2012
On the scoreboard, subsequent Shidos will be accumulated and converted to the opponent’s technical 
score.
When a contestant has repeated slight infringements and is to be penalised with his fourth (4th) Shido, 
the Referee, after consultation with Judges, shall give the contestant “Hansoku-make”, that is to say 
that the 4th Shido is not announced as “Shido”, but shall be announced directly as “Hansoku-make”. 
The contest ends according to the Article 19 (d).
APPENDIX Article 27 - Prohibited acts and penalties
Referees and Judges are authorised to award penalties according to the "intent" or situation and in the 
best interest of the sport.
Should the Referee decide to penalise the contestant(s), (except in the case of Sono-mama in Newaza) 
he shall temporarily stop the contest by announcing Mate, return the contestants to their starting
positions and announce the penalty while pointing to the contestant(s) who committed the prohibited 
act.
Before awarding Hansoku-make, the Referee must consult with the Judges and make his decision in 
accordance with the "majority of three" rule. Where both contestants infringe the rules at the same 
time, each should be awarded a penalty according to the seriousness of the infringement. 
Where both contestants have been given three (3) Shidos and subsequently each receives a further 
penalty, they should both be declared Hansoku-make. 
A penalty in Newaza should be applied in the same manner as in Osae-komi (Article 26 Appendix the 
2
nd and 3
rd paragraphs).
(7) Where one contestant pulls his opponent down into Newaza not in accordance with Article 16 and 
his opponent does not take advantage of this to continue into Newaza, the Referee shall announce 
Mate, temporarily stopping the contest, and give Shido to the contestant who has infringed Article 16.
(9) “Normal” Kumi-kata is taking hold of the right side of the opponent’s Judogi, be it the sleeve, 
collar, chest area, top of the shoulder or back with the left hand and with the right hand the left side of 
the opponent’s Judogi, be it the sleeve, collar, chest area, top of the shoulder or back and always 
above the belt.
If a contestant continues to take an abnormal Kumikata, the time allowed may be progressively 
reduced, and even to a direct penalty.
As long as a contestant makes a cross grip, that means with two hands, one hand, on the opposite side 
of the back, shoulder or arm of the other contestant, he should attack immediately or the referee must 
penalise with Shido. In this situation, it is permitted for the other contestant to grab the legs of his 
opponent without any penalty.
If the contestant’s hand crosses the opposite shoulder line or arm of the opponent, whether touching 
or not, the cross grip is deemed to have been applied.
A contestant should not be penalised for holding with an abnormal grip if the situation has been 
brought about by his opponent ducking his head beneath the holder's arm. However, if a contestant is 
continually "ducking" this way, the Referee should give consideration as to whether he is adopting an 
"excessively defensive posture" (2). 
Hooking one leg between the opponent’s legs unless simultaneously attempting a throwing technique 
or being lifted by the other contestant, is not considered to be the normal Kumi-kata and the 
contestant must attack within 5 seconds or the contestant will be penalised with Shido.
10) “Non-combativity” may be taken to exist when in general, for approximately 25 seconds, there 
have been no attacking actions on the part of one or both contestants. 
On the scoreboard repeated Shidos would become:
2nd Shido 3rd Shido 4th Shido
= a Yuko to the opponent = a Waza-ari to the opponent = Hansoku-make
= Ippon to the opponentPage 31 - Issued 13.10.2012
Non-combativity should not be awarded when there are no attacking actions, if the Referee considers 
that the contestant is genuinely looking for the opportunity to attack 
(14) The act of "encircling" means that the belt or jacket must completely encircle. Using the belt or 
jacket as an "anchor" for a grip (without encircling) e.g. to trap the opponent's arm, should not be 
penalised.
(16) The face means the area within the line bordered by the forehead, the front of the ears and the 
jaw-line.
(23) Even if the thrower twists/turns during the throwing action, this should still be considered
“Kawazu-gake” and be penalised. 
Techniques such as O Soto-gari, O Uchi-gari and Uchi-mata, where the foot/leg is entwined with the 
opponent’s leg will be permitted and should be scored.
(30) To attempt such throws as Harai-goshi, Uchi-mata, etc., with only one hand gripping the 
opponent's lapel from a position resembling Ude-hishigi-waki-gatame (in which the wrist of the 
opponent is trapped beneath the thrower's armpit) and deliberately falling, face down, onto the Tatami
is likely to cause injury and will be penalised. No intent to throw an opponent cleanly onto his back is a
dangerous action and will be treated in the same way as Ude-hishigi-waki-gatame.Page 32 - Issued 13.10.2012
Strict application of the Refereeing Rules in the following fields.-
FORBIDDEN: Grips of legs and blocking: 
All direct attacks or blocking with one or two hands or with one or two arms below the belt are 
prohibited. 
Penalty: First attack: HANSOKUMAKE
Examples:
AUTHORIZED: Grips of legs in sequence of technique 
Grips of legs are authorized after a technique if it’s real and well-differentiated in the time. 
(Real technique is a technique whose intention is to make a fall. It’s the contrary to the false attack). 
Simultaneous or quasi-simultaneous attacks with grips of legs are prohibited. 
Penalty: HANSOKUMAKE
Example:
HANSOKUMAKE BLUE HANSOKUMAKE BLUE HANSOKUMAKE BLUE
HANSOKUMAKE BLUE HANSOKUMAKE BLUE
AUTHORIZEDPage 33 - Issued 13.10.2012
AUTHORIZED: Grips of legs in counterattack 
Grips of legs in counterattack are allowed. 
These counterattacks are allowed only within a sequence (continuity) of techniques started by the 
opponent. The principles of Go-No-Sen. (Counterattack). Without bodies contact the grip of leg(s) is 
prohibited.
EXCEPTION: 
Grip of leg is authorized when the opponent is in the position of cross guard (cross grip).
EXTREME DEFENSIVE POSITION:
AUTHORIZED
SHIDO FOR BOTH
AUTHORISEDPage 34 - Issued 13.10.2012
BJA Commentary:
In Competitions for under 12 year old competitors, Shido will be awarded for the 1st Leg Grip 
offence and any subsequent offences, up to Hansoku-make if necessary, and an explanation 
given to the player.
In Competitions for competitors over 12 and under 16 years of age, Shido will be awarded 
for the 1st offence and Hansoku-make for the 2nd offence. At the age banded British 
Championships, Hansoku-make will be awarded for the 1st offence in this age group.
In BJA Competitions, the Referee and Judges should all be in agreement before awarding 
Hansoku-make. If any contestant receives a direct Hansoku-make, he/she will normally be 
disqualified from that contest only.
Notwithstanding the above, if all three officials agree that an action which was penalised by 
direct Hansoku-make was “against the spirit of judo” then they may recommend to the 
Competition Controller that the offending player should not be allowed to continue in the 
competition.
In all instances, the final decision to disqualify any player from the remainder of the 
competition will be made by the Competition Controller on recommendation from the 
Referee and Judges involved, and/or the Referee in Charge. The Referee and Judges, having 
made a unanimous decision to recommend disqualification from the competition, will inform 
the table officials who will advise the Competition Controller of this recommendation.
ARTICLE 28 - Default and withdrawal
The decision of Fusen-gachi shall be given to any contestant whose opponent does not appear for his 
contest. A contestant who is not at his starting position after three (3) calls at one (1) minute 
intervals, will forfeit the contest.
The Referee must be sure before awarding Fusen-gachi that he has received the authority to do so by 
the Refereeing Commission.
The decision of Kiken-gachi shall be given to any contestant whose opponent withdraws from the 
competition for any reason, during the contest.
APPENDIX Article 28 - Default and withdrawal
Soft contact lens: - In the event that a contestant, loses his contact lens during the contest and cannot 
immediately recover it, and if he then informs the Referee that he cannot continue competing without 
the contact lens, the Referee shall give the victory to his opponent by Kiken-gachi after consulting with 
the Judges.
ARTICLE 29 - Injury, Illness or Accident
The decision of the contest where one contestant is unable to continue because of injury, illness or 
accident during the contest shall be given by the Referee after consultation with the Judges according 
to the following clauses:
a) Injury
(1) Where the cause of the injury is attributed to the injured contestant he shall lose the contest.
(2) Where the cause of the injury is attributed to the uninjured contestant the uninjured 
contestant shall lose the contest.
(3) Where it is impossible to determine which of the contestants was the cause of the injury, the 
contestant unable to continue shall lose the contest.
b) Sickness
Generally, where one contestant is taken sick during a contest and is unable to continue, he 
shall lose the contest.Page 35 - Issued 13.10.2012
c) Accident
Where an accident occurs which is due to an outside influence (force majeure), after consulting 
with the Referee Commission, the contest shall be considered cancelled or postponed. In those 
cases of 'force majeure', the Sports Director, the Sports Commission and/or the IJF Jury will 
make the final decision.
Medical Examinations
a) The Referee shall call the Doctor to attend to a contestant who has received a severe impact to the 
head or back (spinal column), or whenever the Referee has reason to believe there may be a grave or 
serious injury. In either case the Doctor will examine the contestant in the shortest time possible and 
indicate to the Referee whether the contestant can continue or not.
If the Doctor, after examining an injured contestant, advises the Referees that the contestant cannot 
continue the contest the Referee, after consultation with the Judges, shall end the contest and declare 
the opponent to be the winner by Kiken-gachi.
b) The contestant may ask the Referee to call for the Doctor, but in this case the contest is 
terminated, and his opponent shall win by Kiken-gachi.
c) The Doctor may also ask to attend to his contestant, but in this case the contest is terminated, and 
the opponent will win by Kiken-gachi.
In any case whenever the Referee and Judges are of the opinion that the contest should not continue, 
the Referee shall end the contest and indicate the result in accordance with the rules.
BLEEDING INJURIES
When a bleeding injury occurs, for health reasons, the Referee shall call the Doctor to assist the 
contestant in stopping and isolating the bleeding.
In cases of bleeding, for health reasons, the Referee shall call for the Doctor; it is not allowed to 
compete while bleeding. 
However, the same bleeding injury, may be treated by the Doctor on two (2) occasions. The third (3rd) 
time that the same bleeding injury occurs, the Referee, after previous consultation with Judges, shall 
end the contest for the contestant’s own safety and he shall declare the opponent to be the winner by 
Kiken-gachi.
In any case where the bleeding cannot be contained and isolated, the opponent shall be the winner by 
Kiken-gachi.
Minor Injuries
A minor injury may be treated by the contestant himself.
For example in the case of a dislocated finger, the Referee shall stop the contest (by calling Mate or 
Sono-mama) and allow the contestant to reset the dislocated finger. This action should be done 
immediately with no assistance from the Referee or the Doctor and the contestant can continue in the 
contest.
The contestant will be allowed to reset the same finger on two (2) occasions. If the same dislocation 
occurs a third (3rd) time, the contestant shall not be considered to be in condition to continue in the 
contest. The Referee, after previous consultation with Judges, shall end the contest and declare the 
opponent to be the winner by Kiken-gachi.
BJA Commentary:
In Junior BJA Competitions, the contestant will not automatically lose the contest by Kikengachi when asking for medical intervention.
However, if the medical attendant recommends that the injured player should not continue, 
the Referee and Judges may declare the injured player the loser by Kiken-gachi on a 
majority of three decision.Page 36 - Issued 13.10.2012
APPENDIX Article 29 -Injury, Illness or Accident
If during the contest a contestant is injured due to an action by the opponent and the injured 
contestant cannot continue, the Referees should analyse the case and make a decision based on the 
rules. Each case shall be decided on its own merit.
(See paragraph: a) Injury 1, 2 and 3).
Generally only one (1) Doctor for each contestant is allowed on the competition area. Should a Doctor 
require an assistant(s), the Referee must first be informed. 
The coach is never allowed on the competition area.
When the Doctor is called, the Judges shall remain seated and observe the situation. Only the Referee 
shall draw near to the injured contestant to ensure that the assistance provided by the Doctor is within 
the rules.
However the Referee may call the Judges in case he needs to comment on any decision.
Medical Assistance:-
a) In a minor injury:-
In the case of a broken nail, the Doctor is allowed to assist in cutting the nail.
The Doctor may also help in adjusting a Scrotum injury (testicles).
b) In a bleeding Injury:-
For safety measures whenever there is blood it must always be completely isolated with the assistance 
of the Doctor by means of adhesive tape, bandages, nasal tampons, (the use of blood clotters and 
haemostatic products is permitted).
When the Doctor is called to assist a contestant, such medical assistance should be given as quickly as 
possible.
Note: With the exception of the above situations, if the Doctor applies any treatment, the opponent 
shall win by Kiken-gachi.
Types of Vomiting:-
Any type of vomiting by a contestant shall result in Kiken-gachi for the other contestant.
(See paragraph: b) Sickness).
In the case where a contestant through a deliberate action causes an injury to the opponent, the 
penalty given to the contestant inflicting the injury on the opponent shall be a direct Hansoku-make, 
apart from any other disciplinary action which may be taken by the Sports Director, the Sports 
Commission and/or the IJF Jury.
When a Doctor clearly realises – especially in the case of Shime-waza – that there is a serious danger 
to the health of one of the contestants that he is responsible for, he can go to the edge of the 
competition area and call upon the Referees to immediately stop the contest. The Referees shall take 
all necessary steps to assist the Doctor. Such an intervention will necessarily mean the loss of the 
contest for his contestant and should therefore only be taken in extreme cases.
At the IJF Championships, the official team Doctor shall have a medical degree and must register prior 
to the competition. He shall be the only person allowed to sit in the designated area and must be so 
identified.
e.g. by wearing a Red Cross arm-band.
When accrediting a Doctor for their team, the National Federations must take the responsibility for the 
actions of their doctors.
The Doctors must be aware of any amendments and the interpretations of the rules.Page 37 - Issued 13.10.2012
ARTICLE 30 – Situations not covered by the rules
Where any situation arises which is not covered by these rules, it shall be dealt with and a decision 
given by the Referees after consultation with the Refereeing Commission.
BJA ADDITIONAL COMMENTS
Shin pads
Shin pads are allowed providing they do not constitute hard objects (Article 27 Paragraph 
33). They must be of soft padding and not contain hard stiffeners. They may incorporate an 
underfoot band but the band must be in good condition and, in the referee’s opinion, 
sufficiently wide enough not to constitute a danger to either player’s fingers or toes. 
The shin pad must not incorporate an instep pad (which covers the top of the foot) as this 
pad would give an advantage to a “kicker” who should be using the sole of the foot. If a 
player is wearing pads which are deemed unsuitable or unsafe, the Referee should ask the 
player to remove them at the beginning of the contest. (incurring no penalty).
Continuation in the Event of Unconsciousness
The Board of Directors recommends that the following be implemented by competition 
officials.
Players Under 16 years of Age
In the event of a player becoming unconscious for any reason – no further competition that 
day.
No further competition for the following four (4) weeks unless specifically cleared by a 
medical certificate.
Players 16 years of Age and Over.
In the event of a player becoming unconscious for any reason other than as a result of a 
Shime-waza (Strangulation technique) - no further competition that day.
In the event of a player becoming unconscious as a result of a Shime-waza (Strangulation 
technique) - no further competition that day unless checked and cleared by a competent 
medical person who is conversant with judo strangles and their effects.Page 38 - Issued 13.10.2012
ADDENDUM ‘A’ (Extract from IJF Judogi Rules issued 31st August 2011)
Judogi Control procedure
1/The judogi must not be wet, and show any particular stains.
2/The jacket and the trousers need to be of the same brand and of uniform colour.
3/The name of the fighter on the accreditation card has to correspond to the backnumber.
4/ The “IJF Approved” label on the jacket, the trousers and the belt is controlled with a UV optical 
lamp.
5/The logo of the judogi manufacturer approved as “IJF Official supplier” must appear on the jacket, 
trousers and the belt. The brand of the judogi manufacturer must be identical for the jacket and 
trousers.
6/The appropriate backnumber, entirely sewed, with the name of the competitor (corresponding to the 
accreditation card) and the dedicated advertising of the competition (which can be different for the 
white and blue judogi according to the competition protocol).
7/National emblem (on the left side of the jacket at the chest level)
8/Control of the corresponding advertising
9/Control of jacket, trousers (the malleolus [ankle bone] must be visible and accessible for checking 
the length of the trousers) and belt size in compliance with the current regulations.
10/Control of the protection (knee pad, elbow pad, shin pad…). No metallic part or any other part 
made of rigid material is allowed. The control of the size of the judogi is operated with the worn 
protections.
11/Long hair must be tied.
Wearing-out or bloodstains
- A fighter’s judogi must not show any worn out signs, particularly on the collar and the lapel. If the 
condition is assessed as unsatisfactory, the fighter must wear a spare judogi.
- In case of a bloodstain on the judogi, the fighter must wear a spare judogi.
Marking material (logo, emblem, advertising…):
Markings have to be made with material which doesn’t prevent good judo practice.
*In case a fighter wears a colour belt (brown, blue or green), this one must be made of soft material. 
Exemption of the IJF label. No element (sticky, sewed…) masking an element of judogi or belt is 
allowed.Page 39 - Issued 13.10.2012
IJF Label (see picture 1)
Identification corresponding to current IJF rules.
Unforgeable optical label, of 20 cm2
certifying that the judogi complies with IJF current rules.
The label is fixed:
- on the front side and bottom of the jacket, on the left side, (jacket is folded on the right side), near 
or in the re-inforced zone.
- on the front side and the top of the trousers, close to the middle.
- on one or both ends of the belt.
Location of the manufacturer’s logo (see picture 2)
Only one manufacturer’s logo per clothing item is allowed (jacket, trousers and belt)
It must be in an area of maximum 20 cm2
and should be fixed:
-On the jacket, in a visible area:
o Either on the bottom, on the left side (when jacket crossed on the right side) near or in the 
re-inforced zone. See picture 2.
o Or on the bottom edge and inside the publicity zone permitted on the shoulders (25cm x 25cm) 
See picture 2.Page 40 - Issued 13.10.2012
3 possible locations
Only one logo allowed
-On the trousers in a visible area.
(see picture 3)
o Either at the top, at the front side or 
outside (maximum 20 cm from waist string)
o Or at the bottom, on one of the two 
trouser legs at the front side or outside
(maximum 20 cm from the bottom edge 
of the trousers)
-On the belt, in a visible area, at one of the 
two ends (see picture 4)
2 possible locations
Only one logo allowed
6 possible locations
Only one logo allowedPage 41 - Issued 13.10.2012
Advertising (see picture 6) Advertising (see picture 6)
Advertising is allowed only on the jacket. It 
must respect the practical provisions of IJF. 
The advertising cannot mention political, 
denominational or sport organisations other 
than the IJF, the Continental Unions, member 
Nation Federations, their organisations and 
affiliated clubs. It is not permitted to make 
the promotion of tobacco, alchohol, any 
prohibited substances during the fight, listed 
in the doping code, of any product, property 
or service contrary to the morals and to the 
good customs.
On the visible part of the jacket the 
advertising can appear in 4 advertising 
spaces:
-on the sleeves, inside the surface of 
maximum 10 x 10 cm, situated at 25 cm from 
the lower part of the collar.
-on the shoulders, a stripe of 25 cm x 5 cm. 
The stripe must be calcualted from the lower 
part of the collar down the sleeve.
A maximum of 4 different publicities are 
permitted. Only one publicity is allowed per 
space.
National emblem (see picture 5)
Official identification of a nation, a National 
Olympic Committee or an IJF affiliated national
federation.
No commercial brand can be associated to it. 
It is fixed on the left side, at the chest level.
Maximum surface 100cm2
It can also appear in the publicity space.
(see picture 6)
1 possible location
Only 1 emblem allowed
4 possible locations
In EJU events, only EJU suppliers can 
advertise on the shoulder stripesPage 42 - Issued 13.10.2012
Marking (see picture 7):
The name of the fighter is permitted:
-On the bottom of the jacket
-On the top of the trouser
-On one or both ends of the belt
The letters composing the name of the fighter should not exceed a height of 4 cm and a 
length of 20cm. No other markings will be accepted.
Back Number (see picture 8)
It is fixed on the back of the jacket, sewed in a
solid and regular way. The top of the backnumber 
must be placed at 3 cm from the collar. During the
competitions organised by the IJF, it must include 
the publicity of the competition (which is different 
for white and blue judogi)
Colour:
The jacket and the trousers should be of a uniform colour and correspond to the following colour 
references:
-White: Snow white reference
-Blue: maximum Panton colour: 286M minimum Panton colour 286MPage 43 - Issued 13.10.2012
Judogi size (see picture 9):
Judogi and belt are controlled
by SOKUTEIKI
Jacket (see picture 10)
The jacket has to completely cover 
the buttocks.
It has to be 10cm at least from the knee.
At the sleeves level(During the control 
the arms must be straight and the fists 
closed):
-the SOKUTEIKI must slip inside 
Entirely and smoothly
-the distance between the edge of 
the sleeve and the wrist must be 
between 0 and 5cm.
Picture 11
Crossing points of the jacket must be 
at more than 20 cm.
-the thickness of the lapel must be 
less or equal to 1 cm.
-the width of the lapel side must be
between 4 and 5 cm.Page 44 - Issued 13.10.2012
Belt (see picture 13)
-the thickness must be between 4 and 5 mm
-the tips starting from the central knot must have a length btween 20 and 30 cm.
-the knot must be correctly and tightly made. The belt must not be made of a stiff and/or slipping 
material.
Tee-shirt (for women)
-of white colour, short-sleeved, round-necked.
-marking of the manufacturer logo, of maximum 20 cm2
is authorised. It cannot be visible while the 
judogi is done.
-the national emblem representing the official identification of a nation, a National Olympic Committee 
or national federation member of IJF can be fixed on the chest, on the left side.
-no commercial marking can appear.
Trousers (see picture 12
-the distance between the bottom of the
trousers and the exterior malleolus (ankle)
must be less or equal to 5 cm.
-the width must be between 10 and 15 cm
at the knee level.Page 45 - Issued 13.10.2012
GLOSSARY OF JAPANESE TERMS
Japanese English
ANZA Sitting cross-legged
ASHI-WAZA Foot or leg techniques
ATEMI-WAZA Striking techniques
AWASE-WAZA Combination of two Waza-aris
DAN’I Dan grade
DOJO Training Hall
ENCHO-SEN Extended match (e.g. Golden Score Contest)
FUKUSHIN Judge
FUSEN-GACHI Win by default
HAISHA Loser
“HAJIME!” “Start!”
HANSOKU Violation
HANSOKU-MAKE Defeat by grave infringement or
accumulated light penalties 
HANTEI Decision / judging
HIDARI-JIGO-TAI Left defensive posture
HIDARI-SHIZEN-TAI Left natural posture
HIKITE Pulling hand
HIKIWAKE Draw
IPPON Complete point
JIGO-HONTAI Straight defensive posture
JIGO-TAI Defensive posture
JIKU-ASHI Support leg
JOGAI Outside contest area
JONAI Inside contest area
JOSEKI Upper seats
JUDOGI Judo uniform
KACHI Winner
KAESHI-WAZA Counter techniques
KAKE Execution of techniques
KANSETSU-WAZA Joint locks
KAPPO Resuscitation method
KATA Forms
KATAME-WAZA Grappling techniques
KATSU Technique of Kappo
KEIKO Training / Practice
KIKEN-GACHI Win by withdrawal
KIME Complete execution
KINSA Slight superiority or inferiority
KINSHI-WAZA Prohibited techniquesPage 46 - Issued 13.10.2012
“KIOTSUKE!” “Attention!” (Word of command to make persons
stand straight up, closed heels)
KOKA Effect / Minor score
KOSHI-WAZA Hip technique
KUMI-KATA Taking grips
KUZUSHI Balance breaking
KYUSHO Vital point
MA’AI Distance between two contestants
“MAITTA!” “I give up!”
MA-SUTEMI-WAZA Supine sacrifice techniques
MATE Wait
MIGI-JIGO-TAI Right defensive posture
MIGI-SHIZEN-TAI Right natural posture
NAGEKOMI Repetitive throwing practice
NAGE-WAZA Throwing techniques
NEWAZA Groundwork
OSAEKOMI-WAZA Hold down techniques
“OSAEKOMI!” “Hold is on!”
“OTAGI-NI-REI!” “Bow to each other!”
RANDORI Free sparring
RENRAKU-WAZA Combination of several techniques
REI Bow
RITSU-REI Standing bow
SEIZA Sitting square / Formal sitting
SHIAI Match / Bout
SHIAI-JO Competition area
SHIDO Instruction / Light penalty
SHIME-WAZA Strangling techniques
SHIMPAN Refereeing
SHIMPAN’IN Referees
SHIMPAN RIJI Refereeing Director
SHISEI Posture
SHIZEN-TAI Natural posture
SHIZEN-HONTAI Straight natural posture
SHOMEN Dojo front / Upper seats
“SHOMEN-NI-REI!” “Bow towards Shomen!”
SHOSHU Winner
SHUSHIN Referee
SOGO-GAGHI Combined win
“SONO-MAMA!” “Do not move / Hold positions!”
“SORE-MADE!” “Time is up!”
SUTEMI-WAZA Sacrifice techniques
TACHI-WAZA Standing techniques
TAI-SABAKI Body shifting / Body controlPage 47 - Issued 13.10.2012
TATAMI Mat
TE-WAZA Hand techniques
“TOKETA!” “Hold-down broken!”
TORI Player executing technique
TSUKURI Set-up to execute technique
TSURITE Lifting hand
UCHIKOMI Repetition training
UDE-GAESHI Arm locking throw / Arm reverse
UKE Player receiving opponent’s attack
UKEMI Break fall
WAZA Techniques
WAZA-ARI Technique exists / Great advantage
WAZA-ARI-AWASETE-IPPON Two Waza-aris score Ippon
YAKUSOKU-RENSHU Agreed-upon practice
YOKO-SUTEMI-WAZA Side sacrifice techniques
“YOSHI!” “Continue!”
YUKO Effective / Moderate advantage
YUSEI-GACHI Win by superior performance
ZA-REI Seated bow